Now, what were you just saying, Dan?
We're talking about Dan and Priscilla, and it's April 4th.
You have to do this.
What I was saying was that it was my view that there are three types of collectors with regard to the public eye.
There are some collectors, and they can all be great collectors, who choose to remain anonymous no matter what.
And would you cite some examples?
They might let people see that.
For instance.
Well, I can't because they choose to remain anonymous.
But you must know who's similar to mine.
But let's use the example you used.
is the person who collects magic.
It's good.
Okay?
I couldn't, I couldn't.
Do you know how many depositions I've sat in?
No, you're good.
I just want to tell you.
That's... Then there are some collectors who crave publicity.
Malcolm Forbes.
Malcolm Forbes is the art type of a collector who is a great collector.
Great collector.
But every time he buys...
First of all, he bought 99% of the time only at auction.
If you had a great Easter egg and you wanted to sell it to him privately, he wouldn't buy it.
If you put it up at auction, he would bid higher than anybody else.
Absolutely.
He told me that same great statement.
He didn't use the Easter egg example, but he said, if you offer him something privately, he'll say no.
He'll go twice at auction.
I'll give you a concrete example, and that was John Fleming offered...
Malcolm Forbes, an item in 1976, which was by Centennial Catalog, and that was George Washington's biographical fragment.
And he offered it to him for a price that was considerably less than what it realized when it came up at auction in 1988, when George's date sold it, and Malcolm Forbes bought it.
From John's estate?
From John's estate, at auction, against me.
I was bidding, I was the end of dinner on it.
And one of the Ford's sons bought it, for the Ford's collection, at a price that was... And John told me that he had offered it to Malcolm Ford, and Malcolm Ford returned to that.
But the third kind of collector is... The third kind of collector is the person who
He's not looking for great publicity.
He's not a hermit.
He's just interested in collecting.
If somebody comes to him or wants to see his collection... Somebody like me.
Like you, or other people.
There's a good example.
A real good example is this guy, John...
Oh, John Marion.
John Marion.
He's a great example.
Actually, you should talk to him.
That's a major collection.
I can't believe I haven't thought of that.
This guy is a fabulous collection.
This guy's name is John Marion.
Marion Webster.
Same family, I would bet.
Yes, we learned about it the same family.
Well, this guy has a great collection of what?
Of fantasy, illustrated books, and original art.
Heavy on Aubrey Beardsley, heavy on Goodstock Doré, William Russell Flint.
I haven't seen his collection in maybe seven or eight years.
I imagine all the Rackhams, all the Dulac's.
But Rackham and Dulac, everything in... Original art, generally.
I believe he's in his late 80s.
He is a charming man.
Is he still collecting on that?
The very odd thing, but mostly no.
He has a townhouse on the...
on Star Drive, one of those houses at the end of, on the flat of a hill there.
It's not West Hill Place, it's straight next to West Hill Place.
What would make him an interesting subject?
He started collecting when he was about 18 or 19 at Harvard, when I got a student at Harvard, and collected over the years.
When you see his house, he has filled it with books and original art for the books, from the basement to the theater.
It's a top to bottom collection, what I call a top to bottom collection.
He's very accessible.
I can write a letter for you.
I was with Ken Rendell last week.
Oh, yeah, sure.
What a sweet guy.
He mentioned a guy in New York or wherever, and he said Priscilla won't know.
Was his name Koch or something like that?
Fred Koch.
I told her about that.
Did you mention him?
Yes, I mentioned him.
He said, this guy is really a strange guy.
He's inaccessible.
And that's what Ken suggested.
That's the other kind.
That's the kind of person who really, at this stage of his life, anyhow, has the greatest stuff, but he just doesn't want anybody to... Well, he said he did a lot of homoerotic stuff.
Well, I don't know about that, because I've never... Yeah, I'm sure, but I've never told him.
Innocent me.
Naive me.
Why would he go like that, you know?
Nick, I have to say that that is as much rumor as it is fact.
Not that I care.
Personally, I really don't.
I'm really interested in what you collect.
He has a great collection of Jean Cocteau, a great collection, and he has collected Cocteau
for about eight or nine years now, and his main competition has been the Severin Wunderman, who has a museum in California.
Now, when you're out in California, you should see Wunderman or his curator, because this is a museum devoted entirely to the work of one man, Jean Cocteau, and it's the Severin Wunderman Museum of Jean Cocteau, and I have the address.
Hold on, let me get the address for you a little bit.
Is it in the Southern Calico?
Yes, it's in Southern Calico.
But he's a good example of this very private collector.
And in his case, the economic circumstances are huge.
The guy is worth in excess of $400 million.
In the case of Mariam, while he's not poor,
The economic circumstance is cut across the strata.
You can have the poorest person, and you can have the wealthiest person, but the collecting falls into these three areas.
Based on their experience.
Based on my experience, there are these three types.
And it's important for the collector to know that, because we're always looking to improve our collection, which means if we go to other collectors, I have bought three major collections in my life.
Unblocked, as they say.
Unblocked.
And what I have got is the essence of those three major collections and, in addition, things that I have bought singly.
And I've gotten rid of, or in another location, 99% of the material that I ever bought.
So, for instance, what you see here on these three areas are some of the greatest things in my collecting field.
There isn't anybody that has things
that are any better, by and large, in terms of the printed book.
I was just going to say, you went to manuscript stuff, and you just entered.
Very little.
I'm only into letters.
So, if it's manuscript material, that is letters, because I'm interested in the person, Arthur Conan Doyle.
I'm not necessarily interested in having Arthur Conan Doyle's manuscript of Sherlock Holmes.
I'm interested in the books.
Well, that phrase, the creative process.
Right.
That's his letters.
Not necessarily, unless he talks about the war.
Well, yeah.
He's writing about his trip to... Right.
But in Doyle's case, for instance, his trips, he was the first major lecturer from England on the U.S.
circuit.
So when this guy Pond, Major Pond, was a very famous impresario.
I have all of Doyle's letters to Major Pond in 1902 and 1903, but he was touring the United States, from New York to California,
stopping at hotels in Chicago and Oshkosh.
Now, where do you get these, Dan?
Do you get these at auction or from other collections?
At auction, on block, from other collectors.
One of the last things we said in New York, I said, going back even to your early days,
Have you ever bought things on time?
Have you ever bought things on time that economically... I mean, that are really... I still do it.
You shouldn't do it.
I mean, this is an insane thing for me to be doing.
I still do it.
For me to be doing.
The great collector always does it.
The great Coke is worth $400 million.
$400 million.
And he does it.
What's the source of his fortune, by the way?
Coke Industries... I've seen it on heavy equipment.
But Coke Industries...
There are four living brothers that were essentially left the business by their father.
And there was a great legal battle, and two of the brothers split out from the other two.
You can tell the story about Koch Industries.
It's a public story.
I don't want to be quoted on it.
No, but you can tell the story.
So Nick, it's public.
I'll tell you all about those.
Wait a minute, let me get this.
Oh, Thorn is in... Thorn, it works for Max Reed in London.
Really?
Thorn is the woman who went out with Michael, is that right?
She was a debutante who came out and was in school a year after Michael.
I don't know if they went out with each other, like on a date or something like that, but she knew Michael.
She'd be worth, like, giving a ring to her.
She was there?
She was probably here for the Bradley Martin.
All these people are, sort of, Priscilla has developed this amazing circle.
I have to say, this is not to lose her, and I don't want to say it in front of her, but I am poor.
but what she has accomplished as a book dealer in six or seven years.
It's amazing.
I mean, she is at the top of her profession.
Well, I think there's nobody better in this field.
I have been, what, going all over talking to everybody.
Her name comes up.
Yeah.
Anything to do with, and you forgot to use the illustrator.
Time after time after time.
I mean, she was the one who made the market.
She found Frank as a customer and completely overlooked her by everybody.
sold her first catalog on block for a million dollars?
We did.
Sure.
We shipped her first red catalog.
I mean, we don't say anything about it.
I told you the price, but I'm telling you.
On block.
Oh, for a million dollars.
Have you seen that red catalog?
No.
I'm going to ask her about her catalogs.
She really doesn't issue them.
They don't get around, do they?
Once she's issued four or five catalogs, that's all.
Yeah.
And the ones, I believe with Artiste, are all reference books.
I mean, they were sold out as reference books.
Do you think I should call this gal up when I get to London?
I don't think we'll make it.
Yeah.
Yeah, she's at Simmons Reed.
But I mean, don't call her now before I get there.
Maybe call her.
I think it'd be better if we call her in London.
I think so, yeah.
Because then you might want to stop by and have a drink.
Because this way they have time to think about it.
Exactly.
And I don't want to give her time to think about this.
I want these all back again.
I'm a good guy.
This is Priscilla's great reference library.
This is my reference library.
Can I take all these with you?
Sure you will.
Are you going to let me do this?
Yes.
Can I put them in my Xerox machine?
And then return it back to me, okay?
ASAP.
Priscilla is the most assiduous person.
I was just asking Priscilla, after Houghton died yesterday, is that right?
Or within the last couple of days?
Yes, she's a bit.
And the whole...
The burning question for me, and I think this was a burning question for Roger Stott, by the way.
I don't doubt it.
And I'll get back to that later, because Roger works very in the Socratic method.
He doesn't really tell you what he thinks you should be doing, but he suggests.
Anyway, he said, what interests him, and this is what Roger said, what interests me even more than why some people collect is why some great collectors start collecting.
I'd love to know the answer to that.
He said, and I said, who do you mean?
Of course, I should be.
Here I am in the whole library, and I should say, well, of course.
And I did, but I did ask him, and there was this Harrison
with photography.
They mentioned a major Shakespeare collector out of Columbus who never mentioned Arthur Houghton, who would have been the principal example.
Well, I'll tell you the reason he never mentioned Arthur Houghton.
Well, I'll tell you what the burning question is.
The burning question is, what has Arthur Houghton left?
Well, we'll find that out.
We'll find that out in time for me to get it into my book, too, won't we?
You may or you may not.
Well, if they probate the will, I can say I will.
But New Jersey's not that far away.
I think the will will probably be probated at wide plantation.
I mean, it's a short amount.
Probably not.
The will that is probated is public record.
Yes.
Right.
But not everything is in the will.
I'll give you an example right now.
A very good friend of mine died.
He was a trustee of a college.
And he left a million-dollar fund
to be distributed to reasonable individuals or organizations that had an interest that he shared.
That's just the way the will was written.
And he left it under the stewardship of a particular judge.
The million dollars was gone overnight.
In one day's time, the million dollars was gone and distributed.
There were no proposals.
This was to be him like a foundation, as I know.
I was with the guy before he died.
There were no proposals submitted.
Nobody had a chance.
How the million dollars was distributed is a very private matter.
And as long as no laws were broken, you will never know.
But again, this remains to be seen.
Right.
But do you think Arthur would be that private?
I think he will be in some things.
Have you met him, Priscilla?
I met him.
Yes, I met him.
Leonard's asking him that this is just, you know, he said, I was at the Houghton sale, and he said, I saw him in the back, counting the money, scratching his palms with anticipation.
Tell him what John said.
I mean, that's just, no, I've got that on tape.
I mean, Leonard said that.
Is that an unfair observation on Leonard's part?
On the other hand, John Fleming told me that he,
a number of times to various people that Arthur Houghton made more money as book collector, as a collector, than any dealer ever did.
He didn't need it, because we're talking Corning Glassman.
No.
It was a kid, the excitement.
But also, he didn't.
We bought one manuscript.
He bought the Houghton.
That's all he needed to buy.
If you never bought another thing in your whole life, he wanted another story of it.
And he broke it up.
And Betcher still owned at the time of his death, a goodly portion of it.
Didn't he even break that up to prove to the insurance company or something that it was worth what he was saying?
Exactly.
Which is a great story.
And no one would believe nothing of the insurance company.
But they just did a couple of them.
They said, all right, all right.
See, when I was at Harvard, Arthur Houghton was a member of many of the visiting crews of all the libraries.
So I would meet with him, you know, once a year, probably.
We're talking about when now?
Well, this is about 15, 20 years ago.
He would still have been quite involved.
He's very active still.
Very active.
What did John say?
John said he stopped collecting because he wanted to be the executor of the estate.
That is, he wanted to dispose of his estate while he was still alive, rather than take a chance as to what was going to happen to him.
He wanted the auction catalogs of the Arcahoughton collection to stand as memorials in his collecting abilities.
And he wanted to see them while he was alive.
And a lot of people do that.
Evidently, more and more.
We're seeing it happen with, I mean, look at Harrison Horowitz, the same thing.
Those auction catalogs really are quite important to anyone who's collecting the knowledge.
I mean, really.
It was quite a hell of a collection, though.
Did you say that, this was earlier, that Hayden bought some of Houghton's stuff?
No, he bought major things from the Houghton.
Is that right?
Absolutely.
When John went to London for the first Houghton sale,
He was representing, among other people, Haven O'Moore, and the majority of John Fine was for Haven O'Moore at the first and second whole sale.
And to the best of my knowledge, that was the first time that Haven really emerged on the scene as a major collector.
So that was in 79.
It was in 79, and then he was in 80.
The timing is perfect.
That's when they get the money.
That's when we get the money.
That's when they became, that's when we became.
I was already out of Congress for three years.
Did anyone ever, did anyone ever realize that he was the one that had somebody else?
Never in a million years.
I was working at John's place in 1980, in 1979, when the first half of the Houghton sale occurred.
I met Hayden O'Moore for the first time then, but I met him in London?
No, in New York at John's, but I met him as an employee at John's, so Hayden didn't take much notice of him.
The following year, I was in business myself in Boston, and John had came up to Boston several times in 80, 81, 82, for some things of receptions or whatever at the Houghton Library.
We were with him at one classic reception, remember?
And at one of them, one of the receptions, we were with Haven and his wife, and we went out afterwards.
The one with Hans Krauss.
What H.P.
was there?
Right.
Remember what his comment was?
He had to speak German.
Right.
Exactly.
That's the class.
The Goethe exhibition.
Garfield Houghton.
Garfield Houghton, and H.P.
was there, who actually, despite what everyone else said, I always found him to be a very charming man.
No, I didn't find him.
No, but I found him to be a very charming man.
Edward Wolfe paid him the great compliment, though, he said, in terms of knowledge, he said, Couch had it all over Rosenbach.
Oh, I don't believe that's my knowledge.
I've got it.
I'm going to put it in my book.
Holy cow.
Donald Turnhoven is great.
He said, but people didn't like Krauss, but they really liked Rosenbach.
I mean, you could sit and smoke your cigar and drink your scotch with them.
But he said, in terms of real bibliographical knowledge, he said, Krauss had it all over him.
Edwin Wolff said that.
It's absolutely on tape.
It's a documentary statement.
The first time Priscilla and I slept over there, right?
It was wonderful.
Nobody was there.
John left us alone over the weekend.
We were looking at all the books and everything.
We went to sleep in one of his guest rooms.
which were quite beautiful.
Remember, it's all Rosenbach stuff, so if you knew, if you could get a sense of Rosenbach's taste.
Oh, I've been to the Rosenbach house.
His taste was incredible.
So he left us there, and in the morning, the first thing I did was, and I was stark naked, I walk into the big room.
This is embarrassing.
I walk into the big room, and I sit down and play piano.
And I said, this is the wish of mine that I want to play piano.
And he bought a wonderful little piano.
The reason he bought the piano was because he was best friends with Benny Goodman.
Because of John Fleming.
John Fleming.
And Benny Goodman used to play there frequently.
He'd rehearse his group there.
And I had the pleasure, because of Priscilla, along with Priscilla's father, the two of us, had the pleasure of hearing
Benny's last rehearsals shortly before he died, right at John Fleming.
So anyhow, just to get over there and play the piano, playing Chopin and Mozart in Rosenbach's book room.
It was so fun.
It was great.
Because I said, what are you doing?
Why don't you get over there?
What if someone comes in?
You don't know who has keys to this place.
And not only that, he left the place unlocked all the time.
There was no alarm.
No alarm.
And John?
He just died.
I mean, we're not talking about somebody back in the, yeah, we're not talking about the 50s.
Right, he just died.
And he was never hit.
And I can't believe, I'll tell you, sometimes I think Priscilla feels the same way.
I can't believe he's gone.
I mean, I played golf with him.
He taught me how to play golf.
The first time I went out and played with him, I nearly ran him down with a golf cart.
I mean, it was so funny.
The stories are just endless.
How did you meet John?
A mutual friend.
Actually, one of my father's friends, Jack Tainzer, who was at the time Senior Vice President of the Northern Gallery, who was a good friend of my father's and a friend of mine.
I was working for a publishing house in New York.
And I was telling Jack that I kind of wanted to leave the publishing world and go out into business for myself.
And he said, well, you like books.
I've got a friend you want to meet.
At his place.
I'll set it up.
And then he called and said, yes, we're having lunch.
Meet me at Fitzadris next week at 1 o'clock.
And I met John.
And we got along like a house of fire.
And that was the beginning.
I said, this is it.
This is where I want to be.
This is what I want to do.
I mean, it just... 322.
And we got on very well indeed in our relationship.
Though I just never looked back.
He was my best friend, my teacher, my mentor.
Edwin wrote that book.
He did not have access to all the Rosenbach files from that later period.
Yeah, and he won't either.
Well, anything that John kept himself.
Is that right?
And John had all the old cards.
Hmm.
Everything, every book on inventory.
It was pretty much indicated to me that they've got the stuff out.
Well, yeah, that may well be, but part of it John still has.
Because he had all the inventory books, all the Rosenbach inventory books, since they were continued.
In other words, when John bought the inventory, he bought the inventory books.
That's right.
Well, with John Fleming.
And so they're at the Royal Club.
On John's letterhead, he always said, John was a successor to Royal Club.
No, formally associated with Royal Club.
I've never seen a book dealer write that.
By appointment to the Queen.
Yeah, I've never seen any book dealer write that.
And yet he was, at the top of his profession, the number one dealer in the world.
You got it?
Yeah, John Fleming was a plus.
Absolutely.
All by himself.
I'm seeing Colin Franklin.
He did a lot of stuff for Hayden.
Not as much as John.
But I was John's partner.
The first time I met Hayden, he asked me to drop something off to him the next day.
This was in Boston?
Yeah, in Boston, Cambridge.
Oh, the second time went up here, when we met him up here.
And I went by, now the house in Oxford Square that he was supposed to live in.
Right.
I don't believe for a moment, I didn't believe for a moment that he would have lived there.
Remember that?
We were together.
Right.
I remember that day.
And I had to go, and I had to drop something off to him, and it was the apartment next to the house.
There's a brick apartment building, and... That's the apartment spot you're saying, right?
Right, and that's where I dropped the book off, and he came, and he physically came out of that building to pick it up.
Didn't let you in?
No, absolutely not.
You've heard the story about the guy who brought the shit, have you ever heard that story?
Mr. Shaggy told me this story.
What was the... And I've had it confirmed by somebody else, but he didn't know what books they were.
A guy with an Armenian name who worked for Krauss, Kavak, Kavak.
Yes, the Shakespeare first, I don't know who it is, but I know he bought them.
When was this how long ago?
Well, it's whenever he bought the Shakespeare's.
Yeah, 83, 84.
This guy brought them up from Krause, knocked on the door.
Of course, they all wanted to know who this guy was.
Everyone wanted to.
And so he knocked, and he was delivering the package, and he asked if he could use the bathroom.
And Haven said there's a gas station around the corner.
Wouldn't let him in the house.
The sword delivered the book.
She told me about the house.
And he's the one who told me it was the Shakespeare's.
Don't you know what books they were?
He was delivering the Shakespeare's.
So, I mean, after he even had, you know, more detail on it.
By the way, as an aside, Arthur Vershbow will know Joe Van Horn.
And will know the story, whatever.
You're famous in by Joe Van Horn, English press book.
Because Arthur is very much connected with hope.
as was Haven, as was Joe Van Horn.
I think that the press books that were in the garden sale might have belonged to Joe Van Horn, and that's where Haven got them from, because of the best of my knowledge, unless you bought them from Colin Franklin.
Not to give away too much, but I think that I could pretty much totally get it.
In any case, as you can see, on the house, on that one in Oslo,
Yeah, Priscilla told me about it, and I was curious about it.
The one that looks like a fortress?
Right.
Is that Priscilla?
No, it's a wooden house.
There's a wooden house here, but there's one up here that looks like a fortress.
Yes, right, but the wooden house is the one that's supposed to live at.
Is that right?
Right.
But I looked up both houses, from my point of view, quickest way to find out whether somebody's actually living someplace and whether the house isn't in operation, if it's a private house.
in almost every town in Massachusetts.
There's one very simple way.
You check to see if there's a water bill.
To me, that's the easiest way of public utility.
And I checked to find out if there was a water bill for this house, and there was no water bill.
I was there one day in February, and it just snowed.
And somebody had come and put some sand on it.
To me, some of the things that we do is put some sand out there.
And yet on the other hand, I have confirmation that they were living in that house, I don't know when.
But Morrie Bromson, the autograph stealer, who is one of the most bizarre stories, if you talk to him, he will tell you, undoubtedly, that John Follinger's Urgenbeck's illegitimate son, and that Ken Rondell's money comes from the Mafia, and I mean, you know, he's just a total flake.
I mean, this guy is approval for the first order when it comes to some of these stories.
But he did sell Haven, the Walt Whitman Leaves of Grass, that was in the gardens there.
And he...
did some socializing with Haven and Luria after the sale of the book, or they went out to dinner a couple of times.
And through Maury Bromson, Luria and Haven met Jonathan Joseph, who's an interior decorator here in Boston and was on the North Shore, who I happen to know.
Jonathan Joseph is the expert on the American Honest Jane Peterson.
He had his blended collection of Jane Peterson.
And when he was doing the catalog resume on Jane Peterson, he needed some help
editorial help, and I put them together with one of my old colleagues in Boston for publishing, and they did a beautiful book together, and I got thanked and whatever, which was very well received.
Anyway, Jonathan was asked by Haven and Maria to go over and help, you know, and be the interior decorator for this house.
He went in once,
And it never came, nothing happened.
Was there any furniture in there?
No, there was no furniture.
There was no furniture in the house.
Yeah, there was no furniture.
You had a second question.
I mean, somebody else has told you.
Yeah, it was... No, you can't sit down.
It was pretty rustic.
And... So where do they live?
Well, they live, I... They live in the...
I really think this is great.
You're offering very valuable information.
This is one of the great book dealers of our time, and you were his partner.
And I was very much remiss in not writing all of his anecdotes and stories down, because he's a full
He told some very silly jokes, but he had a real English sense of humor.
He was always telling jokes, and always telling stories.
And the stories about the Rosenberg were unbelievable.
And you didn't write any of those stories?
No, but I can remember a lot.
Well, we don't want to remember some of the stories about Rosenberg.
Yeah, some of them were pretty randy.
But John...
I was in New York usually two or three days a week working with him on his premises at 57th Street, and I did his behavior more quickly.
This is from 83 on.
This book was published in 83.
This collection I bought in Argentina, a collection of Lee Dartis, and I got it up to Boston.
And in January of 83, I asked John if he wanted to become my partner by half the collection and become my partner in that.
Partnering?
In this collection.
For this project.
He came to Boston?
But with the proviso that any clients we got from it, we would share from now on, and that we would become partners in any book, any resulting business from this catalog.
In other words, all new books and all new bindings were a joint venture from that time on.
It's the first time he ever handled it.
He'd never done it before.
And the collection was really extraordinary.
That's your catalog?
Yeah.
That's the first catalog.
Yeah, sure.
It's the first catalog.
And... Is he going to do that?
I'll tell you, that's an honor because this catalog is unobtainable.
This catalog is unobtainable.
And so we're going to get a gift or you're going to loan it to me.
No, I'm going to give it to you.
So you're going to scrap it?
Yeah, I'll scrap it to you.
And we had priced the collection at a million dollars.
And we sold it on block before the catalog was published.
So a private collection?
Is someone you can tell me?
No, I can't.
That's good.
But that's okay, too.
How long ago was this?
This was in 1986.
But you could tell me that a private collector bought the collection on block.
You mentioned the figure of a million dollars, but it wasn't necessary.
But this collector is still an anonymous collector.
Yes.
But that's interesting, isn't it?
A serious collective?
I didn't give you any sex.
I'm not trying to... I won't do that in the case right now.
Remember, I told you there are three types of collectors.
An American?
You don't have to tell me.
Yeah, I don't... Actually, I don't even know about that.
Well, was it handled directly?
No, absolutely directly.
He was one of John's... The client was a client of John's.
Let me tell you a story.
I don't want to push you... A lot of people... But this is fascinating.
This is fascinating.
I remember it so distinctly.
John came up to look at the collection.
While we were at 89th century, he took one look at the collection and agreed with Priscilla.
He was going to be partners with her.
Pardon me, but you know what's developing here?
I'm just thinking, I could just write about some of these great collections that are owned by private individuals without having to identify them.
And to illustrate your point, it's a really good point.
He's one type of collector.
So if you talk about... What depresses me is this is the kind of car that steals the Vermeer, too.
How can they enjoy the Vermeer very easily?
But this guy pays for everything, believe me.
But do you see what I'm saying?
They say that, oh, it can't be for a fandom collector because you can't enjoy these things by yourself.
Obviously you can.
Let me continue with this, just to sort of bring it to a conclusion.
John looked at the collection in Boston.
He agreed with Priscilla 100%.
The two of them came to an agreement.
The next thing in the collection was being shipped to New York, and Priscilla and John had agreed that it was going to go on exhibit in John's premises.
What a beautiful premises.
And I was there, and the day the exhibits were being set up, and Brent, John's stuff, Andy Person, was setting up the exhibit.
He had beautifully lit the exhibit.
And there was a guest list, and people were being invited to an opening of this exhibit.
And Priscilla was talking to John about so-and-so might buy it or so-and-so.
John said to Priscilla, don't worry about that.
We've already sold it.
She said, but I'm just putting out the catalog, isn't it?
No, no.
Okay, well, you corrected that.
We were having... Someone, one of John's collectors, had...
John had told this person about the collection over the phone.
The collector was out of the country in September, who was showing the collection, and I told him that this person was on vacation.
You know, you can't get any of the profoundly wealthy in New York in September.
And the catalog was still being produced.
And the catalog was still being put in the box.
It had not been produced.
And I did all of that.
I mean, I designed it.
I designed it.
I wrote it.
I did the whole thing.
Did you write all the stuff?
Actually, it's Peter Wick and Ellingard.
So this one collector had asked for first refusal for the collection en bloc.
In the meantime... What did you call a serious player?
Oh, very serious.
In the meantime, another collector, called Cole, had heard about it from another dealer and wanted
right of second refusal for the collection on block.
In the meantime, about a week later, two weeks later, another one of John's clients called and said he was back in town and said, can we have lunch?
And John invited the collector over, and I ran down with the first catalog.
Only the plate, as you can see, it tipped him.
and they weren't all tipped in.
So I was still willing to place it in the kitchen.
In the kitchen, when the client walked in, looked at the display, and said, how much did you say this collection was again?
And John told him, and he said, well, I'll take it.
Just like that.
And the catalog wasn't finished.
But you're still gluing in the plate.
I'm still gluing in the plate, so I come running out, and John said, it's sold, don't worry about it.
We had the party.
Now, can you describe briefly, I'll read the catalog, but what made this collection such a desirable... Well, this collection... How did you get it, and nobody else?
Oh, I bid against two very serious French dealers.
Oh, so you got this at an auction?
No, it was a private auction.
In other words, the owner of the collection.
It was a private sale.
Private sale.
The owner of the collection asked three dealers,
And that's very common in the book business, by the way.
Private dealers say, oh, absolutely.
The collection, the family that owned this collection opened their paintings in the collection.
And an art dealer, who was a friend, recommended me.
And that was how I... That's a great story.
I can use this, right?
Oh, yeah.
And I went to Argentina to buy the collection.
For the first time.
And mind you, it was in 1882, the Falcons War.
This is your first big... My first big buy.
Big buy.
Yeah.
It was in 1882 in September.
The Falcons War was in August.
I was down there.
I went down on the Falcons War.
Got off the plane.
They lost her luggage.
She had to buy a whole new one.
My bag.
Yeah, my bag got there the day I left.
That's an interesting match.
But I went.
I went.
I was shown into the library, the main room of this apartment in Buenos Aires, and what could have been an awkward and unfortunate experience, because the owner of the collection was, the owners were elderly people who were not well.
The wife was confined to bed, and the man was going on.
There was this man who had loved beautiful things all of his life, and had bought beautiful things all of his life, and had gone wrong with him.
But his tape was impeccable.
Did you name these people on the book?
No, they wished to remain anonymous.
And that's fine.
They had never committed that.
You can do this in a book.
I mean, what's the point?
I mean, I don't have to.
I mean, they're gone now.
I mean, I understand that both of them, both of them, in a sense, passed away because I had such an example, who turned out to be wonderful people.
They were so kind and so hospitable to me.
What could have been a very trying situation.
I mean, these things, the couple had no children.
These books were their great love and passion.
That's another theme I see there.
Yeah.
The Folger syndrome.
And actually, they wanted to sell the collection to divide the proceeds among their niches and methods, because there were several niches and methods from various groups and both.
And what could have been really awkward and really unpleasant was made to be a very charming and wonderful experience.
Did they speak English or used to speak French?
No, we spoke French.
French?
Yeah.
The people of Argentina, especially Buenos Aires, are very cosmopolitan law.
They're very cosmopolitan law.
I remember during that war.
Well, also, French is a language that is spoken in many different places, and German as well, both languages.
Yeah, they're very cosmopolitan law speaking Buenos Aires, although most of them speak English.
These old gentlemen did not speak English very well.
They spoke French, however perfectly.
And his eye was great.
And he had a collection of bindings and illustrated books that were put together in France in the 30s.
And that's what his catalog is?
That's what his catalog is.
His catalog is his collection.
And many of these books are from another great collection, right?
Right.
And these books come from another, the cream of this collection comes from another Argentinian collection.
I think you have that color book.
They're not pressed.
They're great.
Yeah.
Five colors.
They're doing the brochure for me now on the...
This illustrates another point there, that great collections are the meat for a current collector.
In other words, you want to know where the great collections are.
So when they come up for sale, either privately at auction, but many times privately, those are the things you want to go after.
And that's how I got most of my stuff.
What this man did was when his friend died in Argentina, he bought from the widow a number of the best books in the ancient collection, the older collection.
Although the rest of the collection went to auction to a dealer in Paris in the 40s.
the late 40s, 49 or 50, and there was a catalog made of that collection.
Actually, it was Carlo Scherer.
That's not who I bought the collection from, but books from the Carlo Scherer collection formed the nucleus of this class.
And that's documented.
But that's documented in the description.
Did they just invite American dealers?
No.
These books had never been told in the United States before.
No one sold this book.
It's a tremendous excitement.
It's a brand new market.
You have to understand, if you put yourself at that time, I looked at these books when they came in.
In fact, I looked at the cards first.
Ursula got the cards from Argentina.
They were sent to her before she got the books.
And I said, what kind of books are these?
I have never seen these books.
I've been collecting books for a whole week.
The only person who knew about these books that I knew was Ellie Garvey at the Houghton Library.
She was a good friend of mine.
And I talked to her about it.
And eventually, I persuaded Ellie Garvey to write the introduction to her sewing book.
And Peter did it.
And Peter also had been at the Houghton before Ellie.
at the Museum of Fine Arts, and spent every summer in France.
Peter Wick is a very international man and does know about these things.
As a collector himself?
Yeah.
So this was virgin territory then?
Absolutely.
How do you describe it now?
I mean, is it... The prices have gone so high that the books now are virtually unobtainable.
You can't deal in what you can't buy.
You like paintings.
Like great paintings, like the Van Goghs and the Vermeers and those things.
This book, let me show you, the Kirikho Kalygram.
I don't even know what we had to price that individual.
Did you distribute the catalog?
Yeah.
Well, we sold the catalog.
At the time, the selling price was around $60,000.
Did you get any...
Any feedback from people who were unable to buy things out of it?
A lot of that, but the main thing was that most of the real book libraries in this country bought this catalog as a reference book because it was the first time that there were accurate bibliographic descriptions in English of Great French Findings.
This book right here.
Apollinaire's Caligram was a host by De Quirico.
This was in a Bonnet binding.
It was spectacular.
But a copy just went off in Paris with ten original or some original drawings by De Quirico in the book and a binding by Bonnet, and it made around $675,000.
Now, that's one book in this collection that we sold for a million.
Wow.
This book right here.
Do you kind of wish that you'd kept it there?
Coulda, woulda, shoulda, you know.
But you've got to do what you've got to do.
My father always says, sell and repent.
Sell and repent, but sell.
What are you going to do?
I mean, you know.
What is to say?
Who's to know?
Yeah.
This book right here, the Cirque des Trois-Tiles, by Rouault.
That's one of the plays from it.
It's one of Rouault's great clown series.
And these are all original aquitans.
used to routinely go when this catalog was done for around thirty five thirty thousand dollars now the book sells for around eighty five thousand dollars and if you get one of the tirage detect one of the detect the special copies of an extra suite the price is a quarter of a million dollars unbound this is that's unbound that's without you know what were the limitations on this on the catalog oh on the book on the book oh 100 200
And then there's always a special number of copies that have an extra suite or two extra suites, and those are called the detec copies.
And they're on a different paper usually, and the suites are on different paper.
But these bindings, that's what made this collection great, the bindings that were on the book.
Not only were they the best copies of the book, but these bindings are extraordinary.
This binding right here on...
It's by Paul Bonnet, and he writes that there was Carlos Schauer's copy, the great Argentinian collector, and Bonnet's first great patron, Bonnet being the great binder of the 20th century.
He says, this binding is the first on which I've encrusted plaques of ivory.
The color of the illustration has determined the color of the Morocco, and I have tinted and given a precious aura
to this constructive architectural binding, a jewel-like quality of this architectural binding.
Are these artworks?
These bindings?
I think so.
I mean, we aren't really talking about books as books.
We're talking about that.
I mean, we're at another level, wouldn't you say?
A different level.
I mean, certainly text is not the goal here, right?
Oh, but the text is always beautifully printed, enhanced.
It is very much in the tradition of beautiful printing.
I mean, a lot of these books were printed to the early Vollard publications, or the Kahnweiler publications, were printed by Durantier, who was one of the great printers here of the 20th century, who printed the James Joyce Ulysses in France.
The collector here is really collecting a kind of beauty.
Indeed.
Indeed, and he's collecting original art, because all of these books are illustrated with original lithographs or original etchings or original... Something we have to... I have to... Drive points.
I mean, that's the whole point about Leonard Baskin's eyes.
They're all original eyes, or aquatins, or whatever.
And this binding, for example, is on a Picasso, published by Kahnweiler.
And this is Picasso's second or third Cubist book, published in 1914, which is really early for Cubism.
These books are a major, major part of Picasso's work.
You can't, I mean, an art history student couldn't study Picasso's work without taking into account the books that he did, because his evolving styles are exhibited in his books as well.
Did you see that book that was published as a Zoe, that they did the book on Picasso's... Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, and the recent catalog, Braque and Picasso, Inventing Cubism.
But that, I mean, that's the sort of thing that...
You'd be very proud of it.
Yeah.
Well, also, because that's the first time that ever happened, that John Fleming put his name on a title page with another person.
And that's your first catalog?
Yeah.
It's like the Gutenberg Bible.
How do you beat it?
Well, let me show you the second one.
The collection was smaller, but this is nice.
The collection was put together a little bit later.
This is the second catalog, too.
And there are mostly bunny bindings.
Is that an extraordinary look at this?
There's no sound coming for me when I come to listen.
Unreal.
Isn't that beautiful?
Priscilla, where did you develop this expertise?
By handling that collection.
Really?
And having the great good fortune to have a collector ask me to help him build a great collection.
This is not the same collection?
It is the same collector.
And it's thanks to him that... That's the first time anybody's said anything like that to me.
I have handled... You have to be excited with a quote like that.
It's really thanks to him that I've... Thanks to the collector.
Thanks to the collector.
I've had the great good fortune, thanks to him, to handle more of these books than anyone else in the country.
But the collector has forced you to learn, though.
He's forced me to learn.
And Emler and I did.
Because the collector trusted you to build the collection.
You see this... Not quite.
Well, let's say that was a question.
Well, first of all, you should know that I grew up in a home where art was talked about all the time.
My father collected paintings.
And his favorite school of paintings was the School of Paris, the Impressionists and the Post-Impressionists was in the School of Paris.
So I got to learn.
Does he have impressionist painting?
Yes, yes.
And I... French impressionist painting?
French impressionist in French school in Paris.
Yeah.
And I did, and I did learn about them at an early age.
Now when I found out that these same artists, Barnard and Picasso and Braque and Matisse, also did books, which was my great love, because I had been working
I said, oh, my God!
I worked for Harcourt for seven years.
My first job was secretary to Bill Yovanovitch.
When I found out that these very same artists working with their great art dealers, Ambrose Rollard and Daniel Kahnweiler, who were the main art dealers who were responsible for getting these people accepted, and I mean, Rollard, you know.
I just thought it was a match made in heaven.
But I didn't know where I would ever get these books for stock.
And I didn't know how I would ever get to handle them because it's a very capital intensive.
Inventory.
Yeah.
Am I right?
um and when i found this collection i couldn't believe my very good fortune because it's one thing to hear about the book so to look at one page under glass is another thing to sit down and catalog the book and live with it and live with these books and look at the bindings um and that's the other thing i did not know about these one-of-a-kind designer bindings until i saw this collection in argentina it came as a revelation to me that that that someone would would go out and commission a binding
and leave it to another artist's good sense, or artist's good sense, in the case of Paul Bonnet, who wrote that there, to put a binding on a book with original etchings by Picasso in it.
What if they ruin it?
But that's so paradoxical when you come to a book.
A book, the whole concept of printing is to make different copies of things available.
We still want things in first edition to give a thing as a function for the creative process.
Here you have examples of books that are printed that have unique... Unique findings on them.
Unique findings.
So it does make them one of a kind.
Yes, it does make them one of a kind.
Even though there may be 200 copies of the book, they're not going to have this binding.
Although Bonnet surely did work, he surely did do findings in the same theme on the same book.
I mean, he bound, for example, this book, the Tatarand de Tarascon with the Whittos by Ducey, which is probably Ducey's best color whistle book.
usually when he bound this book yeah that's a butterfly binding that's the only one he did on this book but usually when he bound this book um he put a lion's head on it um it's the bonnet de leon binding and he's done several of them uh and um the butterflies work as well you know the story of tetra isn't an intrepid hunter he went out and hunted lions and he collected butterflies and he was a
a wanderer, an adventurer, a kind of larger-than-life character.
And the butterflies work well.
I mean, I happen to think that this may be Bonnet's most beautiful binding, certainly his most ambitious.
But the Tête de Lyon binding is also very much sought after.
What do they do with the original binding?
Oh, there are none.
They come on paper wrappers.
I'll show you.
All French books look the same.
They have paper wrappers on them.
So we're really not altering anything.
Oh no, the point was, in France, if you bought a book, you went out and commissioned to bind it.
I mean, they still don't make price of a book in France.
That's why they call it the French, what do they call it, French,
It's a paperback book, but they call it French rap or something like that.
I've seen that crazy, classy way of saying paperbacks as issues.
Well, as issues.
As issues in rappers.
This is an education for me today.
The French is new.
Yeah.
There was one other person, I have to say, and that's Bernie Brad Gollard.
He's certainly published with him, but he's going to have, or more, but he's in the 70s.
He's been doing this for some time.
Berna Brezza specializes in findings of all periods, whereas I don't have the expertise early even though I haven't had it when I did a specialties.
Which was born in 1900 when Bonnard did the parallel morpholite.
Right, the books illustrated by Picasso, and Jung, and Blot.
What's going on right now?